{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\f4\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author Software House}{\creatim\yr1995\mo8\dy11\hr16\min26}{\version1}{\edmins0}{\nofpages0}{\nofwords0}{\nofchars0}{\vern49203}}
\margl1008\margr2160\margt864\margb720 \ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery360\footery360\titlepg {\header \pard\plain \qc\sl240\slmult0 \f4\fs20 {\b\i\f5\fs18 
Legacy Systems and Functional Cyborgization  -  Alexander Chislenko - <sasha1@netcom.com>
\par }\pard \sl240\slmult0 {\b\f5\fs28 
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \qr\sl240\slmult0 \f4\fs20 {\b\i\f5  -- page \chpgn  --                            Draft 0.82       10 August 1995}{\f5 
\par }\pard \sl240\slmult0 {\b\i\f5 
\par }}{\headerf \pard\plain \qc\sl240\slmult0 \f4\fs20 {\b\i\f5\fs18 Legacy Systems and Functional Cyborgization  -  Alexander Chislenko - <sasha1@netcom.com>
\par }\pard \sl240\slmult0 {\b\f5\fs28 
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qj\sl240\slmult0 \f4\fs20 {\i\f5   The following is a draft  of my new essay suggesting parallels between }{
\b\i\f5 technological enhancements of humans and current work on "legacy" information systems}{\i\f5 .  The essay is aimed at a [relatively] wide audience.  When I have more time, I will turn it into
 a more serious work on general evolution of functional structures, exosomatic personality architectures and other such things.
\par      I would be happy to get any }{\b\i\f5 feedback}{\i\f5  that may help me improve the text and develop these ideas.
\par      If you want to share this text with somebody, please ask me for the }{\b\i\f5 latest version}{\i\f5 .
\par }\pard \sl240\slmult0 {\i\f5\fs24                                                                                                                       
\par            }{\b\i\f5\fs24                     }{\b\f5\fs36  }{\b\f5\fs48 A}{\b\f5\fs36 RE  }{\b\f5\fs48 Y}{\b\f5\fs36 OU  A  }{\b\f5\fs48 C}{\b\f5\fs36 YBORG ?
\par }\pard \qc\sl240\slmult0 {\f5\fs36 
\par }{\b\f5\fs36  Legacy Systems  and  Functional Cyborgization.
\par }\pard \qr\sl480\slmult0 {\f5\fs24               by }{\i\f5\fs24 Alexander Chislenko}{\f5\fs24                }{\f5    [ draft 0.82 -- 10 August 1995 ]
\par }\pard \sl480\slmult0 {\f5\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\sl360\slmult0 {\f5\fs24   The proverbial problem of }{\i\f5\fs24 teaching an old dog new tricks}{\f5\fs24  recently became the focus of a new discipline in computer systems design -- the theory of upgrading old, or "}{\b\i\f5\fs24 legacy}{
\i\f5\fs24 "}{\b\i\f5\fs24  systems}{\f5\fs24 
. The problems of enhancing outdated systems of all kinds have faced the evolutionary process for a long time. Many techniques used now for improving computer systems have been employed to improve various technolo
gical and biological structures, including our own bodies.  We do not have to wait for some future society to generate }{\b\f5\fs24 "cyborgs"}{\f5\fs24 , for instance.  In a sense, they are already among us.
\par }\pard \sl480\slmult0 {\f5\fs24    And you might be one of them.
\par }\pard \qj\sl360\slmult0 {\f5\fs24                                  }{\b\f5\fs24  ___________________________________
\par }{\f5\fs24                                             
\par   Many of today's computer systems, used in applications ranging from corporate accounting to air traffic control, were created long ago, and over the years were patched and fine-t
uned to perform their jobs. Now they seem  too slow, unreliable and inflexible for handling new, more diverse and demanding tasks.  Unfortunately, the functions of these systems are very difficult to understand, and their replacement with new and efficien
t designs seems virtually impossible.
\par 
\par   In such cases, systems architects may use new elements to enhance the old "legacy" systems, using the following techniques:
\par 
\par }{\f5\fs28  }{\b\f5\fs28 Parallelism and Specialization:
\par }{\b\f5\fs24 
\par }{\f5\fs24   - Dividing the increased responsibilities among a numbe
r of old systems. The work  is substantially improved as  individual systems are optimized for performing particular tasks and relieved from other duties. For example, a faster machine may sort records, and the one with a working printer may print them.

\par }\pard \qj\sl480\slmult0 {\b\f5\fs28  Redundancy:
\par }{\b\f5\fs24 
\par }{\f5\fs24   Let several systems work in parallel and compare the results, to make the output more reliable.
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs28  Wrapping:
\par }{\b\f5\fs24 
\par }{\f5\fs24  - Leave the layers of the system that you cannot understand  alone, and replace the others. For example, }{\i\f5\fs24 database wrapping}{\b\f5\fs24  }{\f5\fs24 would leave the old database intact and replace the processing code; }{\i\f5\fs24 
 code wrapping }{\f5\fs24 would leave the old  decision-making algorithms, but replace the database engine; }{\i\f5\fs24  application wrapping }{\f5\fs24 
would preserve the entire application, but would replace its environment - e.g., emulate an operator's input with a programming interface.
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs28   External aids:
\par }{\f5\fs24 
\par   The novel parts of the system can assist the old core in performing its functions.
\par This may include providing the legacy system with necessary resources, pre-processing them for the input, performing some tasks the old system is not good at,  storing some intermediate products, troubleshooting and repair, etc.}{\b\f5\fs24 
\par }{\f5\fs24 
\par  }{\b\f5\fs28  Replacement of parts:
\par }{\b\f5\fs24 
\par   }{\f5\fs24 
 In those cases when the structure and function of some part of the system is well understood, the part can be directly replaced with its improved equivalent. If the original mechanism is convoluted, intertwined, and undocumented, this method should be ap
plied with caution, and only to simple isolatable parts of the system.
\par                                 __________________________________
\par     The above approaches proved useful in updating many computer systems.
\par This experience should be taken into account by the }{\i\f5\fs24 Science Fiction writers}{\f5\fs24  and }{\i\f5\fs24 futurists}{\f5\fs24 
 envisioning future technologically enhanced humans as "cyborgs" -- creatures that will have human biological bodies as their legacy core, but will hopefully have many important [and complex] biological parts directly replaced with improved technological 
equivalents (and a variety of new ones added).
\par 
\par   Of course,  images of mechanical parts sticking in and out of our bodies seem impressive enough to be worth putting into SciFi plots.
\par 
\par    However, the cyborgization of the humankind -- the merger of biological and technological elements -- has been, and most likely will be,  proceeding according to the usual scenario of the evolution of legacy systems.
\par 
\par    }{\b\f5\fs24 Parallelism}{\f5\fs24  and }{\b\f5\fs24 integration of efforts}{\f5\fs24  were implemented before we became humans -- and actually were an important prerequisite for our existence.
\par 
\par    As humans developed sufficient intelligence to embark on the long journey of supplementing their convoluted, undocumented and structurally inflexible  biological bodies with intentionally designed extensions, they started with simple methods and simple
  physical  parts.  At this stage of development,  }{\b\f5\fs24 wrapping }{\f5\fs24 and }{\b\f5\fs24 external aids }{\f5\fs24 
were used, from wrapping the body with clothing to providing it with external implements serving both as extensions to biological organs and as parts of increasin
gly friendly environments -- this includes tools, houses, transportation, heating, cooking, etc.
\par    Also, at this stage new systems began to be used not only for supporting, but for "troubleshooting" the body (medicine) - still without interference in the original design.
\par \page    As things get more sophisticated, the technological supplementation of the biological body repeats the same steps with the information processing. It is the human }{\i\f5\fs24 functional}{\f5\fs24  }{\i\f5\fs24 body}{\f5\fs24 
 that is now being wrapped and augmented, as the new systems consequently accept important tasks of  information acquisition, storage, transmission and processing.
\par }\pard \qj\sl240\slmult0 {\f5\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\sl480\slmult0 {\f5\fs24     Even at this stage, the }{\b\f5\fs24 direct replacement}{\f5\fs24   of biological organs, in accordance with the legacy systems theory, is rare and confined to simple physical parts.
\par 
\par    However, there are ways of introducing implants and shortcuts without violating the structural integrity of the old kludge.  For example, if your brain does not have sufficient memory for carrying some operations, it may  use external me
mory (e.g., a scratch pad)  for storing intermediate data, and then read the results back into the brain's "wetware". This neat trick allows the new elements to play the role of }{\b\f5\fs24 functional implants}{\f5\fs24 
, representing at the same time an }{\i\f5\fs24 internal}{\f5\fs24  structural part of your extended intelligence and an }{\i\f5\fs24 external}{\f5\fs24  part of the body.
\par }\pard \qj\sl240\slmult0 {\f5\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\sl480\slmult0 {\f5\fs24     So while people have been playing with the images of cyborg future of their bodies, they have overlooked the ongoing process of }{\i\f5\fs24 functional cyborgization}{\f5\fs24  they were already taking part in.

\par 
\par    In the scenario of physical integration of biological and technological structures, a cyborg can (and has been) defined as a }{\i\f5\fs24 physically mixed system}{\f5\fs24  -- an organism with a sufficiently large infusion of technological parts.

\par 
\par   A }{\b\f5\fs24 functional cyborg}{\f5\fs24  (should we call it a }{\i\f5\fs24 fyborg}{\f5\fs24 ? }{\i\f5\fs24  fuborg}{\f5\fs24 ? ) may be defined as a biological organism }{\i\f5\fs24 functionally supplemented}{\f5\fs24  with technological extensions.

\par \page    If you do not pay attention,  the stream of technological supplements may turn you into a functional cyborg  before you notice it.  To prevent this, I would recommend that you periodically submit yourself to the }{\i\f5\fs24 
cyborgization check-up }{\f5\fs24  by answering the questions of the following 
\par 
\par }\pard \sl480\slmult0 {\f5\fs24                              }{\b\f5\fs28    FYBORG   SELF-TEST
\par }\pard \qc\sl480\slmult0 {\b\f5\fs24 
\par }\pard \sl480\slmult0 {\b\f5\fs24\dn4 *}{\f5\fs24    Are you dependent on technology}{\f5\fs22  }{\f5\fs24 to the extent}{\f5\fs22  }{\f5\fs24 that you could}{\f5\fs22  not survive without it?}{\f5\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\sl480\slmult0 {\f5\fs24 
\par }{\b\f5\fs24\dn4 *}{\f5\fs24     Would you reject a lifestyle free of any technology even if you could endure it?
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs24\dn4 *}{\f5\fs24   Would you feel embarrassed and "dehumanized" if somebody removed your artificial covers (clothing) and exposed your natural biological body in public?
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs24\dn4 *}{\f5\fs24    Do you consider your bank deposits a more important personal resource storage system  than your fat deposits?
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs24\dn4 *}{\f5\fs24    Do you identify yourself and judge other people more by  possessions, ability to manipulate tools and positions in the technological and social systems than primary biological features?
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs24\dn4 *}{\f5\fs24   Do you spend more time thinking about -- and discussing -- your external "possessions"  and "accessories"  than your internal "parts" ?
\par 
\par 
\par     If you answered "yes" to most of these questions, please accept my congratulations (and/or condolences):  }{\b\f5\fs24 you are already a cyborg!
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\sl480\slmult0 {\b\f5\fs28 ___ ___ ___
\par }\pard \qc\sl360\slmult0 {\b\f5\fs28 \page 
\par }\pard \qj\sl360\slmult0 {\f5\fs24 
     This may be a good point to end the essay. However, whether your current degree of integration with technology already qualifies you as a balanced cyborg, or not  -- and especially if you are already over-qualified, you may be interested in knowing t
he }{\b\f5\fs24 ultimate fate of any legacy system. 
\par 
\par    }{\f5\fs24 
Regardless of the intelligence of the developing process, there are only a few basic options here. Endless patching of aging systems is not the ultimate engineering method. The evolutionary role of a legacy system is to perform some necessary functions an
d test novel design ideas while  better systems are being built from scratch elsewhere. After the new designs become fully operational, the legacy system is invariably placed into a }{\b\f5\fs24 trashbin. }{\f5\fs24 Or, if it is particularly good, health
y and lucky -- into a historical }{\b\f5\fs24 museum}{\f5\fs24 .
\par     Surprisingly, this last journey may not be easy to notice. You may observe it by the following signs: you feel overwhelmed by the complexity and fluidity of the environment and lose both understanding and interest in what is really going on. Instead, 
you concentrate on your local old-fashioned interests and keep playing with the old toys as if they still mattered. The advantage of a museum over a trashbin here is that  the museum feels better, your needs are met 
 there, and ailments treated. You may be offered simple, convenient and wrong token "explanations" on how this is done, yet have no capacity or desire to really understand it. You are even provided with some entertainment and support for your atavistic an
d resource-wasting activities, together with assurances that they are still quite valuable.  In a trashbin, without all these luxuries, you feel lost, sick and useless; new things look weird and alien, old are gone or broken; whatever remains "of value" s
eems rotting around you...  The only advantage of a trashbin is that it doesn't attempt to disguise itself as normal life, so you are at least granted a chance to understand where you really are.   But is it worth it?
\par 
\par    Believe it or not, this is an optimistic scenario.  The world moves ahead.  It just gets too good for }{\i\f5\fs24 you}{\f5\fs24  after a while.
\par }\pard \sl360\slmult0 {\f5\fs24                              }{\b\f5\fs24    _______________________________________
\par }{\f5\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\sl360\slmult0 {\f5\fs24    If you are interested in my more general  views on functional evolution of the world,  I will be happy to e-mail you my essays on  }{\i\f5\fs24 Mind Age, Enhanced Reality, identity, Living Systems}{\f5\fs24 
 and other topics.   You can also access them via my Web home page: }{\b\i\f5\fs24 http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html}{\i\f5\fs24 . }{\f5\fs24 Please send your comments}{\i\f5\fs24  }{\f5\fs24 to}{\i\f5\fs24  }{\b\i\f5\fs24 sasha1@netcom.com}{
\i\f5\fs24 .}{\f5\fs24 
\par }}