  Being both fond of futurology and deeply dissatisfied with everything
I could read in it, I started writing down some of my own thoughts -
on and off - hoping to eventually put it all together.

 Below I am including the first part of my unfinished manuscript in hope
to get response that would either put me in touch with some kindred
spirits, or make me save my time for something more worthwhile.

 So what do you think?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

        Notes on global evolution for fellow Thinkers
        =============================================
     
     
     
     It  is  generally  understood  that the civilization is now going
through several revolutionary transformations. Defining  a  revolution
as  a  structural  transition  between two quasi-stationary states, we
should agree that the main task for any attempt to envision the future
- or understand the essence of current processes - is to describe  the
expected  features  of  the next state, and also develop some ideas of
what we are going to see on the way to it, what other  ways  we  could
choose,  why  this  next state is worth achieving at all, and what are
our options after we get there.
     But  wherever  I looked, these questions were avoided - there are
few people whose scope of vision extends more than a few decades  into
the  future,  and  even their interest rapidly evaporates when you are
trying to discuss with them human alternatives at the stages when  all
processes they enjoy taking part in give way to something structurally
different.
     If  we  compare our way to the future to a road with moving cars,
we would picture some people looking out of the car windows in  random
directions,  some  sleeping  on the seats, and a few trying to steer -
mostly to  overtake  the  others.  And  nobody  thinks  of  the  final
destination...

     Below  I  will try to suggest some reasons why different areas of
thought fail to provide us with adequate concepts of  direction,  some
suggestions  how  we  could  improve the situation, and some of my own
visions  of  long-term  and  ultimate human, social, and technological
future.
            
     Notes on the following text (you don't have to read this)
     ============================
     
     Text structure:
     --------------
                                
     The first few parts represent my today's opinions  on  the  areas
where I have tried to look for wisdom. They can be read in practically
any order.
     The rest of the text contains my own ideas in the order of what I
would  call  increasing  vision. I recommend that you read it from the
beginning down, and when you think it is already too crazy - just drop
it, because further it'll be a lot worse.
     
     Methods of presentation (a disclaimer).
     -----------------------
     
     With  the  greatest  respect  I have to my reader, I am trying to
just outline the path of thought, casting  small  stepping  stones  of
argument  sparingly  and  far from each other, so you have to take big
steps to pass. Well, one who can't make big  steps  wouldn't  get  far
anyway...
     To keep this text short, I also take the  liberty  of  redefining
common  concepts  in what I feel is their broader sense and conducting
some linguistic experiments that  should  look  innocently  simple  to
anybody  who  can understand the ideas of this text. My goal is not to
present the complete set of ideas that I would like you to have  after
reading this article, but to offer some thoughts that will help you to
come  to  these  -  and  other  -  ideas  yourself. Actually, I do not
understand why many authors try to feed us with  'full  and  balanced'
stories  in  areas  that  are  way before completion - instead of just
showing us some spectacular and structurally important pieces that  we
could  use  as  building blocks for further development, even if these
ideas are sketchy, ungrounded, politically incorrect, too  categorical
or plain wrong. Well, since I personally believe that this is the only
way  to  respectably  treat  the  reader in this kind of literature, I
choose it - with this warning - and suggest  that  whenever  you  find
some  statements that you would never agree with - try to think of the
implications of those statements, but not of what should be done  with
a person who puts this kind of stuff on paper.
                                                              
     
              Science Fiction
              ===============
     
     The  remarkable success of Science relies on the departure of its
concepts from  our  [limited]  sensual  experience,  to  more  closely
correspond to the structures of the Real World, while Fiction is bound
to  address  our  sensuality  - and so Science Fiction has to keep one
foot on each side of this widening gap - with, as could  be  expected,
inevitable  traumatic consequences. Now, with SF writers' and readers'
worldviews widening much slower than this  gap,  we  can  notice  that
modern SF is both less romantically appealing to the wide audience and
lags  farther  behind  current scientific frontiers than Jules Vernes'
and many other books of the relatively recent past.
     Today,  seeing  on  the covers of most popular SF books and tapes
those  typical  pictures  of  sexy-barbaric-alien-females-holding-big-
sparkling-shmasers,  we  can  conclude  that [at least, the mainstream
of,] SF has developed into a new set  of  popular  fairy  tales  -  by
creating  an  artificial reality of its own symbols, metaphors, heroes
and environments - and the stories it tells us usually  are  not  even
aimed at expanding its world.
     Still,  even recently, there have been some interesting ideas that
first appeared in the science fiction, including those  of  intelligent
superobjects  and  cyberspace.  But  keeping  up  with the frontiers of
thought, this part of SF outpaces the mass market  interests,  and  the
more its authors try to water their intellectual constructs  down  with
conventional   adventure  plots,  the  more  it  frustrates  those  few
idea-seekers  who  could  really  appreciate  it.  As  a  result,  many
would-be-good-SF-writers    now   tend   to   express   themselves   in
philosophical essays, publications in alternative  scientific  editions
and Internet messages. Good-bye, SF...
     
     
     Economics.
     =========
     
     Economics as a discipline developed when people lived among ample
natural resources and in relatively stable socio-economic environment.
At those times, and until recently, economics provided  insights  into
some  directions  of  the  development of the human society and helped
steer it into the future. Now the situation has changed,  and  so  did
the relevance of the economic theory:
   
     In  the  conditions  when  most  of  the  available resources are
limited, the commonly accepted  practice  of  counting  the  extracted
resources  as  a pure gain in GNP can be compared to moving money from
the right pocket to the left and thinking of  it  as  a  gain  -  just
because we are used to count it only in the left pocket. And no matter
how precisely we do the calculations, we are only fooling ourselves...
     With all markets quickly becoming saturated, the main criteria of
progress  in any sector of the economy are not the increased amount in
the production of the same stuff,  but  those  of  structural  change.
Meanwhile, the economic indicators reflect quantitative changes in the
structurally  stable areas, use questionable methods to disguise small
structural changes as quantitative, and totally fail  to  account  for
the   new  products  constituting  the  essence  of  today's  economic
progress. As a result, economic methods become confined to  a  rapidly
[relatively]  shrinking,  and  no  longer  isolated,  domain of stable
production, and fail to reflect long-term growth in social wealth, let
alone guide it.
     Innovations have never appeared by  means  of  free  exchange  or
direct  orders,  which  can only help allocate necessary resources and
spread the novelty. With innovations becoming the core of  the  social
life  we  will  can  only expect local decision-making (foundation for
market forces) and monocriterial (monetary) considerations to continue
losing their indicative and guiding roles  -  and  give  way  to  more
integrated  control  schemes  that  already  determine the behavior of
other complex systems, from biological organisms and national cultures
to corporations and software packages.
     Attempts to control the society on further levels of  development
with  monetary-economic  indicators might resemble carrying biological
criteria to assess the condition of a political party  by  calculating
total  weight  of its members. Not that such a figure would be totally
irrelevant, but watching it will hardly yield profound  insights  into
the nature of the subject...
     
     Explanations  of  these  simple  ideas  should be provided by the
economic theory itself, but with its  record  of  still  more  evident
flaws  in  many  areas,  we just cannot expect it. For example, I have
always been amazed to read in numerous market reviews that an industry
with the production raising 20% a year and prices falling 30%  a  year
is  in  depression.  In  this  case,  all  market  analysts  report  a
'regrettable 10% decline  in  revenues',  i.e.,  the  money  that  the
industry extracts from the rest of the society for itself. And if none
of  them  ever  thinks  that  such  a  'depression' represents a clear
success in the industry's service of the social  good  today,  can  we
expect  them  to  go  still  farther  beyond the sphere of their local
interests and predict the future demise of the [traditional] economics
itself?

     Demographics and other quantitative sociology.
     ==============================================
     
     For  some  time  I was fascinated by demographics, and later - by
global modeling attempts,  the  Club  of  Rome's  reports  and  other
similar  studies.  Many  of  these works reside on a firm mathematical
foundation and can offer spectacular calculations  of  population  and
resource  dynamics  in,  say,  22nd century, with an accuracy of a few
percent, provided current trends and reproductive patterns hold. So it
might seem that with further improvement of  these  models,  and  some
political    will,    we    could   easily   manipulate   the   global
eco-techno-socium and print out maps of distant future for inquisitive
minds. Unfortunately, however, the underlying assumptions are wrong  -
the   environments   of   the  modelled  systems  change  rapidly  and
drastically. So the population in the year 2150  can  easily  be  100%
higher  or  100%  lower.  And  whatever the figure, we have no idea of
whether it is high or not, since we cannot even imagine what  kind  of
technology  will  service  people  at  that  time  (in fact, I tend to
believe  that  expectations  of  biologically  immortal  and   largely
non-human  population  in 2150 are rather conservative, and by far not
visionary).
     So here we might get some  reasonable  short-term  (10-30  years)
predictions  of  important,  but aging factors. Useful for governments
and some market analysts, but not visionaries.
     
     
     Religion.
     =========
     
     It is hard to find any frame of thought comparable to religion in
 its  ability  to give people stable and comprehensive vision of their
 destiny and purpose of human existence.
     Unfortunately,  most religions are separated from the rest of the
 world of ideas by high walls of belief condition,  which  makes  them
 inaccessible  to  people  who  are used to travel in this world using
 mostly rational paradigms. They just cannot penetrate  through  these
 walls consciously, and all of them, except a few who manage to get to
 that  side in some tunneling transition, have to form all their views
 by rational means.
     Besides,  the rational worldview is increasingly recognized as an
 important tool of improving human life,  exactly  at  the  time  when
 Religion   and  Science  are  getting  more  and  more  difficult  to
 reconcile, because of the Religion's primitive  views  of  the  world
 structure that portray Religion as  a  set  of  fairy  tales  to  the
 followers of pure Science, and do a lot of damage to the integrity of
 worldviews of those who are still trying to combine the two.
     Those silly tales,  however,  have  as  little  relation  to  the
 Religion  as  do  modern  scientific  theories,  and are no more than
 artifacts of ancient science that found themselves embedded into  the
 body  of  religion,  and,  due  to its conservative nature, are still
 being carried along.
     I still believe  that  it  is  possible  not  only  to  reconcile
 religion  and  science, but develop a unified world theory that would
 fully integrate both. However, all my attempts to  discuss  ways  for
 this   integration,  like  extensions  of  morphogenetic  fields  and
 semantic space concepts, transhuman ethical principles, possibilities
 of development of intelligent - and beyond - quasi-material entities,
 or at least  such  evident  subjects  like  development  of  emergent
 distributed  features  in  super-complex material systems - all these
 attempts are shrugged off as too esoteric by all rationalists,and are
 righteously ignored by the Believers who are  not  interested  in any
 studies of their objects of worship that start from research of their
 metabolic processes.
     And though it seems that those nice objects would be much  better
 off  if  there  was  a  place in their admirers' minds for both their
 beauty and design,  I will still keep trying  to build  a bridge over
 the wall surrounding the beautiful city of Religion with its somewhat
 narcissist inhabitants, only from the  outside,  together  with  other
 ambitious  rationalists.  Maybe,  we'll  get some help from the other
 side when we are half way through...
 
 
     Science.
     ========
     
     In  my  own experience, the better I learn to convey my thoughts,
the  sooner  my  listeners  understand  that  this  is  something they
definitely do not want to strain their brains for; the only way  seems
to  try to lead them from where they are to where they know they might
enjoy it, then get them make the  next  step,  hoping  that  in  those
little  steps  and peculiar paths they will ultimately get to the apex
of knowledge that has always been so near... But is  this  game  worth
it?  Especially  taking  into  account  that  there  are lots of other
directions for growth, many at least as good as mine, and  nobody  can
follow  them  all  at  the  same time... Another idea is to help those
people to harmonize their ideas  in  their  sphere  of  understanding,
using  my  experience  in my special field, but without trying to even
outline the map of my field.

     Same thing seems to happen with  the  attempts  to  simplify  the
increasingly  complex  scientific  ideas  to general audience; most of
them just cannot be adequately projected on the  non-professional  set
of  concepts, and as a result the society is alienated from this field
of research, and the field is not getting  the  funds...  Instead,  we
could try do develop metaphors that cannot be smoothly extended to the
prevailing professional paradigm (in other words, limited, irrelevant,
etc.), but represent structures of knowledge that can help the rest of
us  harmonize  our  understanding  of  the  world  and  reconcile  our
primitive  misconceptions  of  the  Reality's  structure with those of
modern science (humor intended).
     In  fact, the world is full of such concepts, but due to a narrow
understanding of their metaphors by professionals (as  'truths'),  the
non-professionals   have   to   develop   them   themselves.  Results:
  ------------------------------------------------------------
Transhumans should not be expected to be  super-humans,  to  excel  or
even  succeed  as  humans  (just  as  humans  don't have to succeed as
animals to be superior to them). They may also look like humans,  just
as  those  look  like  animals,  or  collections  of  cells, or atomic
structures. But there always are emergent features,  unobservable  for
the previous level...
     Transhumans  develop  visions,  superhumans  do  the work, humans
provide 'democratic' control.
  ------------------------------------------------------------
Flaws in  biological  design  (kludge):  -  species  don't  share
inventions due to absence of mechanism and standards, though there's a
pool  of  genetic  freeware in terms of food, viruses, etc. (a species
could try to slow down the development  of  other  species  by  making
genes  incompatible,  but  would  definitely loose more by not getting
anything else - that's  a  clear  great  opportunity,  but  the  blind
process  couldn't use it); - vision maps and other kludges; - outdated
stuff - our memories getting rigid, fat supplies.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
 - what discipline then? Well, the disciplines are areas with positive
feedback, and tend to distort the picture, and preserve it........  If
we  could  videotape  the process of scientific growth in the space of
ideas, we would see it start as a small round egg  near  the  original
point  of  zero  complexity,  then  develop little bulges representing
appearing ideas, mindsets and, later, institutions, pushing their  own
areas  outwards.  After  a  short  period  of  such  growth with local
positive feedbacks, our nice egg turns into a full-scale octopus...
Some of the tentacles develop in the directions that...

 Identities, pride etc. when features are shared.
     Greek  mythology  -  3  Gray  sisters  - they had one eye and one
tooth; Ulysses sees them, one sister says: 'give me an eye so  that  I
can see him".
  ----------------------------------------------------------
     Soon we'll be able to produce robots with basic image  recognition
and  motor  skills  that  will be able to replace humans at many manual
jobs. What will those people do? Read Shakespeare? And: are we producing
superior  beings  (robots)  to  enslave  them  only  because  we  don't
recognize  them  as  beings?  Is  that what the whole robot industry is
about?
     
     System design.
     =============
     
     Nobody has ever produced a single bit of matter. All  that  people
have being creating is structures. Until recently, the structures have
been  mostly  material  (now  less  and  less  so),  which is not their
essence, as some humans still manage to believe, but a  temporary,  and
regrettable, factor.

      Arts and economics
      ==================
 
     Let  us  call  the  realm of structures that we use to build other
structures economics, and structures that we directly enjoy  -  art.  A
couple of exemplary notes:
     
     1) Protein structure of food isn't art, even if food *seems* to be
the  final  consumer product. It isn't, since economics doesn't stop at
the skin boundary, and neither should  our  theory.  It's  rather  the
boundary  of  consciousness  we should do our accounting at (*lots* of
reservations here), and the parts  of  (intentionally  produced)  food
structure that reach this boundary are definitely [culinary] art.
     2) This realm division is functional, which means that [different
aspects of] the same structure can represent both economics and art.
     Some of  the  art  we  enjoy  when  it  enters  our  consciousness
(momentary  pieces with instant access, like [simple] pictures, tastes,
etc.); some - in the process of their digestion  by  the  consciousness
(music,  movies,  dances,  games), and still others - after pre-loading
them  into  our  minds  (memories,  theories  and  other  nice   mental
constructs).

	- Alexander Chislenko <sasha1@netcom.com>    5/11/1992
Home page: http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html